have you recently had a barbecue or a
bonfire in the backyard can be a real
lot of fun but did you know that the
ashes from one of these fires can be
spread around the garden to produce more
bigger better healthier tastier fruit
and vege get a I'm my from self
sufficient million in this video I'm
gonna explain what happens when you use
ash in the garden let's get into it
[Music]
[Applause]
ash contains potash which is important
for healthy plant growth and lots of
other things that I'll mention soon
potash the name comes from the old way
of making potassium fertilizer by
burning plants and wood in pots pot ash
and then collecting the ash to use in
the garden in fact the name potassium
itself is derived from the word potash I
like to crush down the larger chunks of
charcoal into smaller pieces and still
use them in the garden because I think
it adds extra structure to the soil and
good water-holding capabilities as well
as extra nutrients and minerals you want
to use these ashes as soon as possible
especially before it rains or a big
storm because much of the potash or
potassium will leach out of the ash and
be lost into the soil or the surrounding
area Oh crikey
she's pretty heavy the white ash as
opposed to the darker stuff or the dark
charcoal is better for potash it has
more potassium in it so the whiter the
ash the bear it is in the garden using
ash isn't a new concept at all it's been
around for hundreds of years and humans
have known about it but Nature has known
about this for much longer
I mean think about the revival after
bush fires how devastating say even in
Australia the devastation a bushfire can
cause going through
a bush or forest and leaving basically
nothing but ashes behind and then how
soon and shortly after things sprout up
even better than ever before in fact
there are some plants and seeds that
will only survive or only germinate
after they've been burnt through a fire
potash or potassium is the third major
nutrients that crops require after
nitrogen and phosphorus so you know how
you see on the packs of fertilizer NPK
or the K actually stands for potash or
potassium you'd think it would be NTP
wouldn't you but it's not the K is Latin
or something like that or means some
it's the element so yeah so what's so
good about potash how does it help
plants to grow and thrive firstly potash
itself helps to strengthen the cell
walls of a plant and that gives it
better immunity against diseases and
fungal attack it makes fruit and veggies
taste better by improving the nutrient
pick up and flow of water and sugars to
develop that fruit better it improves
water holding in the soil so you don't
have to water as much and that plant can
get access to moisture when it requires
it without it drying out so fast potash
improves flowering and therefore more
flowers means more fruit so bigger
productivity and bigger harvests and it
can even make your food crops look
better and more colorful because they're
more vibrant and healthier adding potash
to the soil or straight ash like this
makes the soil more alkaline so what
does that mean it makes the soil sweeter
that's the best way I can explain it
it's like humans you know some humans
are real sweet tooth they like lollies
and cakes and and other humans like more
acidic type foods they're into their
pickles and they're more savoury just
like humans most plants are sweet
tooth's so they like a more alkaline or
sweeter soil
plants like brassicas broccoli cabbage
lettuce beans peas spinach etc and fruit
trees like stone fruits mangoes and
avocados and there are some plants that
are very savory and only like an acidic
type soil like blueberries potatoes and
even sweet potatoes other plants aren't
as choosy and will tolerate sweet and
acidic soils plants like the tomatoes
behind me chilies dill and cucumbers
alright come on let's get into the
veggie garden and spread this stuff
around we've got garlic in these two
beds here this one here is a smaller
garlic
it's a Glenn large funny yeah well
smaller compared to this one which is a
elephant garlic a nice big large bulb
garlic is part of the onion family which
does like a more alkaline or sweeter
soil so all I'm gonna do is just simply
grab handfuls of it and just sprinkle it
around you could probably wear a face
mask for this I probably should be but I
want to talk in this video and not sound
like well because otherwise I'd sound
like a muppet then you wouldn't be able
to hear what I'm saying
you'd probably switch off nice big
handfuls and you know generously
sprinkle it around
I'm almost using it like a thin mulch
I'm not going to worry too much that
some of the dust is settling on believes
because later on once I'm finished I'm
gonna water this in any way and that
will penetrate and wet this agent which
will in turn release that potash get it
into the roots and the soil which makes
it easier and more soluble for the
plants to take it up so once I start
wetting it those that dust that's on the
leaves will get washed off anyway there
is also an interesting different tonight
between ash collected from a fire pit
compared to wood heaters or stoves and
that is whilst they're both alkaline
sweet the fire pit or bonfire ash is
richer in potash and the reason why is
due to the smaller twigs bar
leaves etc that is incinerated contains
more nutrients than ash made from just
the core wood from a large tree I will
do this round bed next I tell you what
this stuff goes a long way we're only
down about four to five inches from the
top of this bucket and we've already
done basically two beds full of garlic
I'll just give myself a clap and you can
see just how easy and well it just goes
straight into the soil there's hardly a
sign that there's been any ash thrown on
top of this now all getting washed off
the leaves
[Music]
talking about free fertilizer you can't
get any freer than this or easier to
make or easier to use nice generous
amount so how much potash or potassium
ez Nash well as a general rule you can
expect about 10% so for every hundred
grams of ash there should be about 10
grams of potash let's put some around
these blueberries hey should spark them
up a bit what's that oh I'm not supposed
to because blueberries are an acidic
loving plant so don't do it mark is that
what you're saying
good Anja well-spotted thanks for
letting me know that's right I almost
forgot
you can't put ash in with these
blueberries that might even hold their
growth or make the leaves die back they
can't take up einar's good they'll go
yellow great point same with these
potatoes here even though they look nice
and healthy you think maybe if this is
great for other plants could it be good
for potatoes no it might stunt the
growth and again make it hard for the
plant to thrive and take up other
nutrients same for the sweet potato
behind me here I would not bother around
this big beautiful garden bit of sweet
potato because it could probably hamper
growth rather than improve it so there
is a few more plants up the top here
having a fire pit in the backyard is
magic on so many different levels but
only does the food taste great on it but
it's actually using up the fallen timber
you don't have to chip it you just burn
it burn it to ash such a simple and easy
way to get rid of garden life you can
see this one bucket is doing quite a lot
isn't it leeks part of the onion family
as well and will love a little bit of
this
as you can see I don't measure anything
out I'll just sprinkle the ash liberally
around the base of the plants spinach
absolutely loves this stuff and who
doesn't love spinach Hey
make your strongest Popeye
and if you've got mangoes stone fruit or
avocados throw a little bit under them
as well
well that'll do me I think I'm gonna
keep this and save it for another time
for something special that I just need
it for rather than just throwing it
around the garden willing nearly at the
moment store away in the shed much
better then stored down there in the
fire pit where I could get all wet and
soggy and leach all those great
nutrients away so if you've got a fire
pit or a fire or ashes from something
use it in the garden I hope you enjoyed
this video if you did give it a big
thumbs up and also subscribe if you
haven't already share the video around
and that is what happens when you use
ash in the garden thanks a lot for
watching bye for now what a great use I
suppose there's plenty of other uses
fash I just can't think of any at the
moment maybe I could do some face
painting or something our face mask
maybe you know is supposed to be good
for your skin probably could do with
some of that on my skin
my son
all right let's go put this away and get
into something else
Cheers